## Demise of the smart city discourse

In a broad sense, smart cities can be described as places where information technology is combined with infrastructure, architecture, and everyday objects to address social, economic, and environmental problems (Townsend, 2013). Other closely related concepts include ubiquitous computing, ambient intelligence, ambient informatics, urban informatics, internet of things, sentient city, or computerised spaces (Graham, 2005; Greenfield, 2006; Waal, 2011). The range of terms illustrates the absence of a single point of origin of the smart city ideal.

The lack of consensus surrounding the concept of the smart city makes the term bloated with various connotations depending on the target audience and thus devoid of any particular meaning or interpretation. The smart city has become a de facto shorthand for multinational ICT and infrastructure companies to promote their products to a global market of cities desperate for comprehensive solutions to increasingly pressing urban issues (Batty et al., 2012). This “mainly business oriented message of the smart cities movement” (Batty, 2013, p. 11) has lead Adam Greenfield, one of the most vocal critics of the contemporary smart city rhetoric, to declare an intellectual bankruptcy of the vision of the smart city (Greenfield, 2017). Greenfield (2013) goes as far as to suggest that the term appears to have originated with business “rather than with any party, group or individual, recognised for their contributions to the theory or practice of urban planning” (par. 22).

The dominant smart city narrative focuses primarily on the technology, cost-effectiveness, and relentless optimisation in an attempt to impose a vision of clean, computed, centrally managed urban order (Townsend, 2013). This approach is reminiscent of the paternalistic top-down city planning ideology of the second half of the 20th century so eloquently exposed by Jane Jacobs (1961). Similarly to how the aerial imagery inspired the design of mega-scale modern cities, smart city designs today are guided by an expanding data collection capabilities that offer increasingly robust computational analysis of minute details of lives of city dwellers (Batty, 2012; Greenfield, 2006; Towsend, 2013). The next section critically examines some of the ideological underpinnings, assumptions, and challenges posed by this data-driven approach to urban planning.