## A false promise of a sentient city

Most of the existing smart city conceptualisations are entirely predicated on “ubiquitous, pervasive and interlinked arrays of computerized spaces” that continuously collect and analyse data from an increasingly sophisticated sensory apparatus embedded in the urban fabric (Graham, 2005). As city planners rely more and more on data aggregated by such systems, it raises thorny issues of the nature of data and how is it used to inform the urban planning processes.

Significant advances in big data analysis and machine learning are pushing organisations to embrace data as the core component of their operations to a degree where data is fetishised as something inherently objective and non-political (Greenfield, 2017; Han, 2017). The unstated assumptions about the nature of truth contained within the data or its potentially dubious origins rarely come under severe scrutiny despite the significant implications for public decision making and urban development (Goodspeed, 2012; Townsend, 2013).

Every mathematical model of the real-world phenomena is inherently an approximation. While such models are useful for analysis and improving understanding, they should be considered as a diagnostic tool, a means to an end, rather than the underlying mechanism permeating the fabric of the city. Models and computer simulations seduce smart city designers because they replace the complexity of the real city with models that disregard the subjective reality of citizens and leave out the peculiar way groups make decisions (Townsend, 2013). According to one of the prominent contemporary critics of technological utopianism Evgeny Morozov (2010) “[p]art of the problem seems to lie in the public’s penchant for fetishizing the engineer as the ultimate savior, as if superb knowledge of technology could ever make up for ignorance of local norms, customs, and regulations” (2010, par. 10).

The data-driven approach to smart cities reduces people with their unique personalities and rich cultural backgrounds to a stream of standardised data to be treated as interchangeable statistics (Greenfield, 2013; Jacobs, 1961). In this schema, the role of the citizen “is simply to generate data that can be aggregated and subjected to analytical inquiry” (Greenfield, 2013, par. 7).  However, according to Townsend’s (2013) interview with Michale Batty “[a] lot of the old questions which you’d think might be informed by new data are not” (p. 315). 

The model of the smart city outlined above is rooted in a technocentric engineering mindset that strives above all for optimisation, efficiency and by extension for uniformity. By seeking to rid themselves of every possible inefficiency, cities risk losing the diversity and vigour that are so characteristic of them – ultimately leading to a colonisation and mechanisation of everyday life by information technology (Greenfield, 2006; Townsend, 2013). However, this approach to urban management is incompatible with the assertion of leading researchers in the field of science of cities which admit that “our science has become less orientated to prediction but more an aid to understanding, to structure debate“ (Batty & Torrens, 2001, p. 3).

The glorification of the engineering culture and its focus on the capabilities of the latest technology, most apparent in the field of ICT, is also a staple in the data-driven view of the smart city.  In this perspective, cities are seen as a software problem where the primary concern is with the underlying code which is taken at face-value as something intrinsically objective and neutral. However, this overly deterministic view disregards the fact that values, opinions, biases, and rhetoric are frozen into code (Bowker & Leigh-Start, 2000). Moreover, “intractable properties of certain kinds of technology are strongly, perhaps unavoidably, linked to particular institutionalized patterns of power and authority” (Winner, 2003, p. 134). With computational capabilities dissolving deeper into the background of everyday life, exposing the cultural and spatial politics of code present a significant challenge for the future of smart city planning (Graham, 2005; Townsend, 2013).

It is essential to look at the technology embedded in cities not just as objects but also as knots of social, economic and political interest (Batty, 2013; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011). The technodeterministic perspective outlined above is part of a broader tendency to put a combination of neoliberal, consumeristic principles and ideologies of governance at the centre of the smart city discourse (Graham, 2005). This rhetoric is guided by the reductionist mentality of dataism - an ideology that asserts that the entire universe is comprised of data flows and the value of any phenomena or entity is measured by its capability to contribute to data processing, including the value of a human life (Han, 2017; Harari 2017). Within such context, the “data-driven management for cities is an irresistible fiscal force shaping the future” of commodified and individualised spaces (Graham, 2005; Townsend 2013).

Technology firms designing smart cities solutions are increasingly “making choices, about technology, business, and governance, with little or no input from the broader community of technologists, civic leaders, and citizens themselves” (Townsend 2013, p. 110). Their profit-driven view of the city puts forth a vision of a neoliberal city of governance-as-a-service in which personalised infrastructural services treat citizens as individual customers (Greenfield, 2013; Waal, 2011). Such conception of the smart city leads “towards the 'splintering’ of the sociotechnical and geographical fabric of contemporary cities” (Graham, 2005, p. 576) and a development of business models for a fully privatised city (Greenfield, 2013). And since “[w]hoever owns this layer of proprietary protocols and infrastructure will truly hold the keys to the city”, local governments are effectively handing over the control over their urban affairs to private business interests (Townsend 2013, p. 290).

Provisioning of cities with a vast sensory and data processing capabilities also raises critical issues of power dynamics. Informatic and biometric modes of surveillance permitted by ubiquitous computational awareness allow power to move at the speed of an electrical signal (Baumann & Lyon, 2012). The pervasive extension of power into public space poses a danger of a panoptical surveillance that constrains behaviour at the level of architecture (Baumann & Lyon, 2012; Greenfield, 2013). Such “code-based technologized environments continuously and invisibly classify, standardize, and demarcate rights, privileges, inclusions, exclusions, and mobilities and normative social judgments across vast, distanced domains” (Graham, 2005, p. 563). Inequal access to data generated by these vast structures puts citizens, particularly poor communities, at the mercy of those who can measure and control from a distance (Cinnamon, 2017; Goodspeed, 2012; Townsend, 2013).

The vision of all-seeing sentient city driven by business interests poses a danger of creating private cities, exuberating inequality and social polarisation by creating a ‘capsular society’ dominated by the cultures and biopolitics of separation and continuous digital filtering and tracking (Batty, 2013; Comer, 2011; Graham, 2005). This conquest of everyday life through a ubiquitous analysis of geolocated patterns of life epitomises an advanced form of society of control where control is short-term, continuous and without limit (Deleuze, 1992; Greenfield, 2006). A city that tracks and controls its citizens is not a smart city, but an authoritarian one.

Technocratic principles outlined here are already being put to use in supposedly exemplary smart city designs around the world. Songdo in South Korea and Masdar in the United Arab Emirates are entire new city districts being built around the principles on a data-driven urban operating system that offers a “high-precision control panel for the entire city” (Townsend 2013, p. 67). In Rio De Janiero, IBM has built an operations centre for local government that, in the words of Rio’s then major Eduardo Paes, “allows us to have people looking into every corner of the city, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week” (Townsend 2013, p. 67). The way these projects are currently imagined, ”not one of the canonical smart cities seems as if it might be capable of supporting a usefully differentiated human ecology” (Greenfield, 2013).