## Towards smart civics

The previous section paints an Orwellian picture of the future of smart cities. There is, however, an alternative vision that treats “smart as an add-on, an upgrade, and not the end itself” (Townsend, 2013, p. 286). In this perspective, smart cities are conceptualised at the scale of an individual and focus on small-scale tactical urban interventions rather than grand city-wide schemes (Townsend, 2000; Townsend 2013). It is an approach that sensitively leverages advanced technology but is not driven by it, to create platforms for localised citizen micro-control of the physical environment (Greenfield, 2017; Townsend, 2013).

Networked technologies allow the decision-making power to be pushed closer to the people being most affected by the local urban development. By treating citizens as agents of change, novel forms of participatory urbanism enable better collective approaches to decision-making (Batty et al., 2012; Paulos, n.d.). Support of grassroots efforts for urban self-governance empowers citizenry to help themselves through distributed technology, as opposed to imposing centralised technocratic structures on them. Such micro-scale transformative processes aim to preserve local cultural diversity while improving the wellbeing of the city as a whole.

The 20th century has witnessed a culmination of centuries worth of knowledge about vernacular structures and construction best practices which have been distilled into accessible compendiums. Misguided by the capabilities of the latest technology, the contemporary smart city rhetoric misses the fact that “many problems can be adequately addressed simply by conventional design” (Townsend, 2013, p. 286). Books such as *Patten Language* (Christopher et al., 1977), detailing generation-tested best practices for construction of homes and cities, or *Design for the Real World* (Papanek, 1972), presenting a framework for socially responsible design, offer anyone an opportunity to have a more constructive relationship to the built environment around them.

The challenge for future smart city designs is not so much a matter of coming up with ground-breaking technological solutions, as it is a matter of improving communication and knowledge sharing across local communities, governments and professional industries. Integration and coordination of individualised and localised technology can lead to a synergy of personal and professional knowledge that will be necessary to build thriving cities in the future. Such approach “must involve ways in which the citizenry is able to participate and to blend their personal knowledge with that of experts” (Batty et al., 2012, p. 485). 

Wireless mobile technology presents a yet untapped potential for participatory urbanism. Smartphones, in particular, have become an essential cognitive prosthetic for city dwellers all around the world. These smart handheld devices augment many aspects of life in large cities by “reprogramming the basic rules of interaction for urban inhabitants” through various sensors and geolocation capabilities (Townsend 2000, p. 100). Hospitality, taxi, and food services are some of the industries getting most disrupted by platforms such as Airbnb, Uber, and Foursquare. Admittedly business-oriented, these platforms illustrate the potential of mobile technology to significantly alter the everyday experience of people living in cities. Despite the rapid growth in the number of smartphone users across the globe, urban planners and policymakers have not kept pace with the industry and are slow to sensibly incorporate these devices into their designs and processes.

Most attempts to leverage mobile technology to improve citizen participation originate with grassroots efforts lead by well-intentioned hobbyists and technologists. Such projects manage to showcase the potential of decentralised forms of decision-making by temporarily engaging citizens, professionals and local governments in a joint urban design process. Unfortunately, they tend to gradually taper off due to the lack of sustained long-term development and timid political will to incorporate these novel modes of governance into an existing formal framework for city planning. Moreover, successful experiments in decentralised urban innovation are hard to scale up to the city level due to their localised nature.

Governments tackling massive socioeconomic issues are reluctant to invest in small-scale projects with questionable outcomes. In their view, they cannot afford to rely on groups of enthusiasts tinkering with gadgets to solve their urban ills and instead call for the might of “sustained industrial engineering applied to replumb entire cities over the span of a decade” (Townsend 2013, p. 165). Governments, pressed for time and resources, cling to one-size-fits-all quick fixes that neglect the complex and intricate social fabric of the city. Looking back at the urban development in the 20th century, “it is of utmost importance in setting the smart cities agenda in the wider social context without which we are destined to repeat the physicalist mistakes in the past planning of our cities” (Batty, 2013, p.26).